# Setting up Google Cloud VM
## Creating SSH key
Create a "ssh" folder to save your SSH keys into. Generate using the following command:
```
ssh-keygen -t rsa -f <filename> -C <keyname> -b 2048
```

It will create a private and a public key. Open the contents of the public key - you can use `cat <filename.pub>`. Go to Google Compute Engine, navigate to Metadata, click SSH keys, and paste the contents of the public key into the text field, then save it.

## Creating and connecting to VM instance via SSH
Navigate to the VM Instances tab, create a new instance (in this case, we used `Ubuntu 20.04 LTS` with 30GB of space and 16GB of RAM). Once the instance is provisioned, copy the external IP and connect to it from the terminal using the following command:

```
ssh -i <path/to/privateky> <key username>@<external IP>
```
If you receive an error that the key is unprotected, you need to modify its permissions so that it is only accessible to the user. You can use `chmod 600 <path/to/privatekey>` to do so.

Note that the installation comes with Google Cloud SDK pre-installed, which can be verified using `gcloud --version`. You can also see a live display of the hardware metrics using `htop`.

## Installing Anaconda
Search for Anaconda download, and copy the link to download for the Linux distribution. The link should be available at the bottom of this page: `https://www.anaconda.com/download`

Use `wget` to download the package. After it is download, you can list it using `ls`, then run it by using `bash <anaconda filename.sh>`. Install it to the default location.

## Creating a config file for SSH
To streamline future connections, we can create a config file with all our default connection information. Create a new blank config file by running `touch config`. 

Fill in the details as follows:
```
Host de-zoomcamp
    HostName 34.124.191.105
    User dylantan
    IdentityFile /workspaces/zoomcamp2024/ssh/gcp
```

Note that this config file needs to be placed in the `root/.ssh` directory. With it in this directory, you can then type `ssh de-zoomcamp` to connect.

Note: You may need to run `sudo chown $USER <config path>` and do the same for the private key for this to work.

## Using VM on VSCode
Install "Remote - SSH" extension on VS Code. On the bottom right, click "Open a Remote Window", or click the Codespaces, and configure the SSH config file accordingly. Note that this is now on your LOCAL MACHINE, so find the path and edit accordingly. You may have to modify the permissions to the private key accordingly so it is read-only and not publicly readable. On Windows, use the following commands:
```
icacls yourkey /inheritance:r
icacls yourkey /grant:r "YourUsername:R"
```
You should now be able to connect to the codespace on Google's VM directly.

## Cloning Data Engineering Zoomcamp Repo
Find the github repo, click Code > Copy the HTTPS URL. In the VM, type `git clone <Github URL>`

## Install Docker on VM
Prepare list of packages by running `sudo apt-get update`.
Then get Docker by running the following command: `sudo apt-get install docker.io`

To run docker without using sudo, look up "running docker without sudo". We can follow the guide [here](https://github.com/sindresorhus/guides/blob/main/docker-without-sudo.md).

Alternatively, just the run the following (thank you, ChatGPT):
```
sudo usermod -aG docker $USER
newgrp docker
```
Verify your user is now in the docker group by typing `groups`, and if it is, you should be able to run docker commands without using sudo.

Now let's install Docker Compose. Go to their webpage, find the latest release (on the right) for Linux x86. Create a subfolder bin using `mkdir`, then `wget <HTTP>`. Make it executable by running `chmod +x <filename>`.

To allow it to be executable from anywhere, edit the bashrc by doing `nano .bashrc`, then navigate to the bottom, and add:
```
export PATH ="${HOME}/bin:${PATH}"
```
Ctrl-O to save, Ctrl-X to exit. Use `source .bashrc` to reapply your bashrc configs. (Note: commands in .bashrc automatically execute when you start a bash session)

## Port forwarding in VSCode
To access ports from the VM directly on your local machine, you can forward the ports. Next to terminal, click "Ports", then forward accordingly (e.g. `8080` for pgadmin, `5432` for pgcli, `8888` for jupyter notebook)

## Installing Terraform on GCP VM
Search for "Terraform Download", click on Linux, search for the Ubuntu (or whatever is relevant) binary files. Pick the Amd64 version - copy the link, wget it.

Since it comes zipped, we need to unzip. Install the unzip pacakge by running `sudo apt-get install unzip`, then run `unzip <terraform zip file>`. You shoould now have a `terraform` file in the bin folder, and since bin is already in the path, we can run `terraform -version` from any directory to see it is installed.

## Using sFTP to transfer files into the VM
Use `sftp <host>` to connect (similar to using SSH). Make a directory using `mkdir <directoryname>` for the credentials JSON, then upload it using `put <source file path>`.

## Authenticating Terraform with GCP
First, declare the path to the Google Credentials:
```
export GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS=~/.gc/gcp.json
```
then, run the authentication using this:
```
gcloud auth activate-service-account --key-file $GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS
```

You can now use Terraform by navigating to a folder with the terraform configuration files and using `terraform init`.

## Stopping the VM and restarting
You can stop the VM (not delete) by running `sudo shutdown now`. 

When you restart the VM, there will be a new public IP assigned to it. Go to your `./~ssh/config` file, edit it using `nano` and replace the IP address before attempting to reconnect.