## OLAP vs OLTP
## Overview
OLTP = Online Transaction Processing, OLAP = Online Analytical Processing.

OLTP is to control and run essential business operations in real time.

OLAP is for planning, solving problems, support decisions and discover hidden insights.

## Data Warehouse
An OLAP solution, used for reporting and data analysis. Contain meta data, summary data, and raw data. Data warehosues can be further filtered into data marts.

## BigQuery
Serverless data warehouse solution. Infrastructure provides scalability and high-availability. It maximises flexibility by separating the compute and engine and analyzes data in storage. 

### Partitioning vs Clustering
Partitioning splits up a table into smaller tables (partition based on your frequently filtered columns), while clustering is how that data is sorted within the table. E.g. Partition by Date, then Cluster by Tags.

#### Partitioning

Types of partitions:
<ul><li> Time-Unit Column
<li>Ingestion Time (_PARTITION TIME)
<li>Integer range partitioning
</ul>
Max partitions limit is 4000.

#### Clustering
Columns you specify are used to colocate related data. Order of the columns is important (determines sort order of data). 

Cluistering improves:
<ul><li>Filter queries
<li>Aggregate queries</ul>

Tables that are smaller than 1GB don't show significant improvement with partitioning and clustering. You can specify up to four clustering columns.

### When to pick clustering or partitioning
#### Clustering > Partitioning
* When partitioning results in a small amount of data per partition (approx less than 1GB)
* Partitioning results in a large number of partitions beyond the limit of 4000
* Partitioning results in your mutation operations modifying the majority of partitions in the table frequently (e.g. every few minutes)

### Best Practices for BigQuery
**Cost reduction:** 
* Avoid SELECT *
* Price your queries before running them
* Use clustered or partitioned tables
* Use streaming inserts with caution
* Materialize query results in stages


**Query Performance:**
* Filter on partitioned columns
* Denormalizing data
* Use nested or repeated columns
* Use external data sources appropriately
* Reduce data before using a join
* Do not treat WITH clauses as prepared statements
* Avoid oversharding tables
* Avoid JavaScript user-defined functions
* Use approximate aggregation functions (HyperLogLog++)
* Order Last, for query operations
* Optimize your join patterns
    * As a best practice, place the table with the largest number of rows first, followed by the table with the fewest rows, then place the remaining tables by decreasing size

# ML in BigQuery
