# Setup
## Getting green taxi parquet files into GCS
Booted up the VM on GCS and created a quick python script to get all the green taxi files for 2022:
```
import os
import requests

folder = '/home/dylantan/data-engineering-zoomcamp/greentaxidata'

if not os.path.exists(folder):
    os.makedirs(folder)

for i in range(1,13):
    month = str(i).zfill(2)
    url = f'https://d37ci6vzurychx.cloudfront.net/trip-data/green_tripdata_2022-{month}.parquet'
    file_path = f'{folder}/green_tripdata_2022-{month}.parquet'
    print(f'Downloading from {url}')

    response = requests.get(url)
    with open(file_path, 'wb') as file:
        file.write(response.content)

print('Operation completed')
```

Then ran the following command to get into GCS Bucket:
```
gcloud storage cp /home/dylantan/data-engineering-zoomcamp/greentaxidata/ gs://zoomcamp-dylan/greentaxiparquet --recursive
```

## Foreign table creation
In BigQuery, created a new dataset for this homework and loaded the gcs bucket using a wildcard to specify all the files in the parquet

# Questions
## Question 1: What is count of records for the 2022 Green Taxi Data?
Going to the native table, we can see in the details tab there are 840,402 records.

## Question 2: Write a query to count the distinct number of PULocationIDs for the entire dataset on both the tables. What is the estimated amount of data that will be read when this query is executed on the External Table and the Table?
Query: `SELECT DISTINCT(PULocationID) FROM 'de2024-dylan.homework3.greentaxi-external'`

Seems to be 0MB for both external and materialized table.

## Question 3: How many records have a fare_amount of 0?
Query: `SELECT COUNT(fare_amount) FROM 'de2024-dylan.homework3.greentaxi-native' WHERE fare_amount = 0`

Result: 1622

## Question 4: What is the best strategy to make an optimized table in Big Query if your query will always order the results by PUlocationID and filter based on lpep_pickup_datetime? (Create a new table with this strategy)
Partition based on lpep_pickup_datetime (the filter) and cluster by PUlocationID (the order)

Query:
```
CREATE TABLE `de2024-dylan.homework3.greentaxi-partitioned-clustered`
PARTITION BY DATE(lpep_pickup_datetime)
CLUSTER BY PUlocationID
AS
SELECT * FROM `de2024-dylan.homework3.greentaxi-native`;
```

## Question 5: Write a query to retrieve the distinct PULocationID between lpep_pickup_datetime 06/01/2022 and 06/30/2022 (inclusive)

Use the materialized table you created earlier in your from clause and note the estimated bytes. Now change the table in the from clause to the partitioned table you created for question 4 and note the estimated bytes processed. What are these values? Choose the answer which most closely matches.

Query:
```
SELECT DISTINCT PULocationID
FROM `de2024-dylan.homework3.greentaxi-native`
WHERE 
lpep_pickup_datetime BETWEEN '2022-06-01' AND '2022-06-30'
```
* Estimated usage for materialized: 12.82mb
* Estimated usage for Clustered: 1.12mb
  
## Question 6: Where is the data stored in the External Table you created?
GCS.

## Question 7: It is best practice in Big Query to always cluster your data:
False

## Question 8: Write a SELECT count(*) query FROM the materialized table you created. How many bytes does it estimate will be read? Why?
It already has the metadata of the record count in the schema, so no reading needs to be done.


